# 6.1 Introduction

In [Section 5.12](0131411551_ch05lev1sec12.html#ch05lev1sec12), we saw our  TCP client handling two inputs at the same time: **standard input** and a **TCP  socket**. We encountered a problem when the client was blocked in a call to `fgets` (on standard input) and the server process was killed. The server TCP correctly sent a FIN to the client TCP, but since the client process was blocked reading from **standard input**, it never saw the `EOF` until it read from the socket (possibly much later). What we need is the capability to tell the kernel  that we want to be notified if one or more I/O conditions are ready (i.e., input is ready to be read, or the descriptor is capable of taking more output). This capability is called **I/O multiplexing** and is provided by the `select` and `poll` functions. We will also cover a newer POSIX variation of the former, called `pselect`.

Some systems provide more advanced ways for processes to **wait** for a list of events. A **poll device** is one 
mechanism provided in different forms by different vendors. This mechanism will be described in [Chapter  14](0131411551_ch14.html#ch14).

**I/O multiplexing** is typically used in networking applications in the following scenarios:

- When a client is handling **multiple descriptors** (normally interactive input and a network socket), I/O multiplexing should be used. This is the scenario we described previously.

- It is possible, but rare, for a client to handle multiple sockets at the same time. We will show an example of this using `select` in [Section  16.5](0131411551_ch16lev1sec5.html#ch16lev1sec5) in the context of a Web client.

- If a TCP server handles both a listening socket and its connected sockets, **I/O multiplexing** is normally used, as we will show in [Section  6.8](0131411551_ch06lev1sec8.html#ch06lev1sec8).

- If a server handles both TCP and `UDP`, **I/O multiplexing** is 
  normally used. We will show an example of this in [Section 8.15](0131411551_ch08lev1sec15.html#ch08lev1sec15).

- If a server handles multiple services and perhaps multiple 
  protocols (e.g., the `inetd` daemon that we will describe in [Section  13.5](0131411551_ch13lev1sec5.html#ch13lev1sec5)), I/O multiplexing is normally used.

**I/O multiplexing** is not limited to network programming. Many nontrivial applications find a need for these techniques.