# Chapter 4. Interrupts and Exceptions

An *interrupt* is usually defined as an event that alters the **sequence** of instructions executed by a processor. Such events correspond to electrical signals generated by hardware circuits both inside and outside the CPU chip.

Interrupts are often divided into synchronous and asynchronous interrupts :

1、***Synchronous interrupts*** are produced by the **CPU control unit** while executing instructions and are called synchronous because the control unit issues them only after terminating the execution of an instruction.

2、*Asynchronous interrupts* are generated by other **hardware devices** at **arbitrary times** with respect to the CPU clock signals.

> NOTE : 两者的来源不同，一个是源自CPU，一个是源自其他的**hardware devices** 


Intel microprocessor manuals designate **synchronous** and **asynchronous** interrupts as ***exceptions*** and ***interrupts***, respectively. We'll adopt this classification, although we'll occasionally use the term "**interrupt signal**" to designate both types together (synchronous as well as asynchronous).

> 英特尔微处理器手册分别将同步和异步中断指定为异常和中断。 我们将采用这种分类，尽管我们偶尔会使用术语“中断信号”来指定两种类型（同步和异步）。

**Interrupts** are issued by **interval timers** and **I/O devices**; for instance, the arrival of a **keystroke** from a user sets off an interrupt.

**Exceptions**, on the other hand, are caused either by **programming errors** or by **anomalous（异常的） conditions** that must be handled by the kernel. In the first case, the **kernel** handles the **exception** by delivering to the **current process** one of the **signals** familiar to every **Unix programmer**. In the second case, the kernel performs all the steps needed to recover from the **anomalous condition**, such as a **Page Fault** or a request via an assembly language instruction such as  `int` or  `sysenter` for a kernel service.

We start by describing in the next section the motivation for introducing such signals. We then show how the well-known IRQs (Interrupt Requests) issued by I/O devices give rise to interrupts, and we detail how 80x86 processors handle **interrupts** and **exceptions** at the **hardware level**. Then we illustrate, in the section "Initializing the Interrupt Descriptor Table," how Linux initializes all the **data structures** required by the 80x86 interrupt architecture. The remaining three sections describe how Linux handles **interrupt signals** at the **software level**.

> NOTE: 思考Unix signal和exceptions和interrupts之间的关系。Unix signal都对应的是exceptions？关于这个问题，参加《docs/Programming/Signal/Signal.md》

