# 3.3. Process Switch

To control the execution of processes, the kernel must be able to **suspend** the execution of the
process running on the CPU and **resume** the execution of some other process previously suspended.
This activity goes variously by the names ***process switch***, ***task switch***, or ***context switch***. The next
sections describe the elements of process switching in Linux.

## 3.3.1. Hardware Context

While each process can have its own **address space**, all processes have to share the **CPU registers**.
So before resuming the execution of a process, the kernel must ensure that each such register is
loaded with the value it had when the process was suspended.

The set of data that must be loaded into the registers before the process resumes its execution on
the CPU is called the ***hardware context*** . The hardware context is a subset of the ***process execution***
***context***, which includes all information needed for the process execution. In Linux, a part of the
**hardware context** of a process is stored in the **process descriptor**, while the remaining part is saved
in the **Kernel Mode stack**.

***SUMMARY*** : 上面这段话非常重要



In the description that follows, we will assume the  `prev` local variable refers to the **process descriptor**
of the process being switched out and  `next` refers to the one being switched in to replace it. We can thus define a **process switch** as the activity consisting of saving the **hardware context** of  `prev` and replacing it with the **hardware context** of  `next` . Because **process switches** occur quite often, it is important to minimize the time spent in saving and loading hardware contexts.

Old versions of Linux took advantage of the hardware support offered by the 80x86 architecture and performed a **process switch** through a  `far jmp` instruction [`*`] to the selector of the **Task State Segment Descriptor** of the  next process. While executing the instruction, the CPU performs a **hardware context switch** by automatically saving the old **hardware context** and loading a new one. But Linux 2.6 uses software to perform a **process switch** for the following reasons:

> [`*`] `far jmp` instructions modify both the  `cs` and  `eip` registers, while simple  `jmp` instructions modify only  `eip` 

- Step-by-step switching performed through a sequence of  `mov` instructions allows better control over the validity of the data being loaded. In particular, it is possible to check the values of the `ds` and  `es` **segmentation registers**, which might have been forged by a malicious user. This type of checking is not possible when using a single  `far jmp` instruction.
- The amount of time required by the old approach and the new approach is about the same. However, it is not possible to optimize a **hardware context switch**, while there might be room for improving the current switching code.

**Process switching** occurs only in **Kernel Mode**. The contents of all registers used by a process in **User Mode** have already been saved on the **Kernel Mode stack** before performing process switching (see Chapter 4). This includes the contents of the  `ss` and  `esp` pair that specifies the User Mode stack pointer address.

