[TOC]

# 1.6.1. The Process/Kernel Model

When a program is executed in **User Mode**, it cannot directly access the **kernel data structures** or the
**kernel programs**. When an application executes in **Kernel Mode**, however, these restrictions no
longer apply. Each CPU model provides special **instructions** to switch from **User Mode** to **Kernel Mode**
and vice versa. A program usually executes in User Mode and switches to Kernel Mode only when
requesting a service provided by the kernel. When the kernel has satisfied the program's request, it
puts the program back in User Mode.

Processes are dynamic entities that usually have a limited life span within the system. The task of
creating, eliminating, and synchronizing the existing processes is delegated to a group of routines in
the kernel.

The kernel itself is not a process but a process manager. The process/kernel model assumes that
processes that require a **kernel service** use specific programming constructs called **system calls** .
Each **system call** sets up the group of parameters that identifies the **process request** and then
executes the hardware-dependent CPU **instruction** to switch from **User Mode** to **Kernel Mode**.

Besides user processes, Unix systems include a few privileged **processes** called **kernel threads** with
the following characteristics:

- They run in Kernel Mode in the kernel address space.
- They do not interact with users, and thus do not require terminal devices.
- They are usually created during system startup and remain alive until the system is shut down.

***SUMMARY*** : 

- [What is a Kernel thread?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9481055/what-is-a-kernel-thread)
- [Understanding Kernel Threads](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_aix_72/kernelextension/kern_threads.html)



**Unix kernels** do much more than handle **system calls**; in fact, kernel routines can be activated in
several ways:

- A process invokes a **system call**.
- The CPU executing the process signals an exception, which is an unusual condition such as an
  invalid instruction. The kernel handles the exception on behalf of the process that caused it.
- A peripheral device issues an **interrupt signal** to the CPU to notify it of an event such as a
  request for attention, a status change, or the completion of an I/O operation. Each **interrupt
  signal** is dealt by a kernel program called an **interrupt handler**. Because peripheral devices
  operate asynchronously with respect to the CPU, interrupts occur at unpredictable times.
- A kernel thread is executed. Because it runs in Kernel Mode, the corresponding program must
  be considered part of the kernel.

